---
layout: post
title:  "Sansone 2020, 40–41"
date:   2022-05-02 21:51:00 +0900
categories: Q
---
Something, when reading Classical texts, nobody told explicitly, but many, if not every, seems to have been curious about: 

> [N]o rational principle---indeed, no discernible principle of any kind---lies behind the practice of printing Greek prose when it comes to such matters [*i.e.* marking elision, crasis, etc.]. So, for example, in the Oxford text of *Gorgias* 507e6---508a4 Burnet prints φασὶ δ' οἱ σοφοί ... οὐδὲ ἀκολασίαν, with elision marked in one place but not in another, and in this he is followed by Dodds. The explanation for this inconsistency lies in the inherent conservatism that imposes itself on the editing of Classical texts: an earlier reading is automatically taken over in a subsequent edition unless the editor makes a conscious decision to alter it. Features of the text that do not significantly affect the meaning, such as accentuation, crasis, elision and the presence or absence of nu-*ephelkystikon*, are often adpoted unthinkingly. And so the same inconsistency we see in *Gorgias* 507a6--508a4 is found already in the text of Plato printed in 1578 by Henri Estienne and, before that, in the Aldine edition of 1513. The Aldine edition, printed in Venice, was based on manuscripts that happened to be available to the editor, Aldus Manutius, in that city. But there is no reason to believe that the manuscripts on which Aldus relied had any special authority. On the contrary, a papyrus from the second century AD that preserves fragements of *Gorgias* 507--8 reads, with no word division, punctuation or diacritical marks, φασιδεοισοφοι ... ουδακολασιαν. That is, the papyrus exhibits a practice exactly the opposite of what is found in modern printed texts. Since we have no reliable evidence for what the author intended, this edition employs *scriptio plena* throughout. That is not to say that it is assumed that Plato in speaking avoided a pronunciation that would be more accurately represented using the written conventions of crasis and elision. We simply cannot rely on any of the manuscripts available to us, whether ancient or mediaeval, for reliable evidence regarding Plato's spoken practice (Sansone 2020, 40--41).

- Sansone, D. (2020), *Menexenus*, by Plato, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.